id "blog-jet-plane"
title "Leaving on a Jet Plane"
date "2016-05-31 03:39AM -0600"
description "Heading out on the road, er um, on a plane"
tags ["unity", "word game", "tsc2", "travel"]
--

<p>I guess my posts here have been a bit rambly so far [you don't say &mdash;
ed].  I suppose it probably means I could use an editor [ya think? &mdash; ed],
but I don't have one [that's true, too &mdash; (non-existent) ed].  So I'll just
have to try and keep things a bit more focused this time on my own.  It's not
really that easy when you're jet-lagged like I am right now (and already was a
bit short on sleep starting the process I wrote the last post)[<a href="#foot-1" id="back-1">1</a>], which I suppose
is just a bit ironic, since I haven't actually gone anywhere at all.</p>

<p>Yet, anyway...  In a couple of days I'll be on a plane to Brussels (and then
catching the train to Köln) and I <i>am</i> pretty tired right now because I'm
sleeping days (i.e., not very well.  Too warm, too bright, too noisy).</p>

<p>Originally, the plan was to head to Köln and shift my schedule there before
heading along and meeting the wife (for the real reason I'm heading to Europe
&mdash; to attend a wedding.  Not ours.  We're already married.  Obviously). But
then things changed, I no longer have a fixed schedule, and now I'll show up and
(hopefully) won't be too jet-lagged at all (maybe a little, though, I guess
we'll see).  But...  The tickets were procured long ago, so I'll mostly be
taking it as a programming retreat, I guess.  That's what I did last time I was
in Germany (for exactly the same purpose, getting used to the time change before
meeting the wife &mdash; though in London that time).  I basically just worked
from a friend's apartment while adjusting. This time, though, just working, I
guess, no adjusting. I like Köln quite a bit, so it's good, and I was pretty
productive doing it last time, so that's good too.<p>

<p>So, uh...  If you're anywhere near Nordrhein-Westfalen and reading this
(yeah, right?  It does seem unlikely, apart from people I already know there
&mdash; much too early for GDC Europe and such this year) drop me a line.
:)</p>

<p>In more on-topic news, I've dived quite a bit more into Unity and, uh... It's
basically been a story of overcoming hatred, because, um, well...  The
adjectives I'd use for Unity right now (at least for the Mac version integrated
with MonoDevelop) are unintuitive, opaque, fragile, and worst of all, buggy.  In
a word, frustrating.  I'm not exactly impressed; as an IDE it's hands-down the
worst I've ever used.  Still, I've...  Come to some accommodation with it, you
might say (and I'm most certainly not willing to write my own cross-platform
framework, as not-very-tempting at all as that might be sometimes).  I've gotten
pretty much all of the internal game logic (and unit-ish tests &mdash; some of
the tests are a bit integration-y) working, now it's just time to try and get
the GUI finished.  If Ai-chan gets the music done while I'm gone, I might be
able to integrate everything and release it fairly soon. We'll see.<p>

<p>I did throw some of the excessively ambitious ideas for the word game
overboard, though, while I was testing and refactoring things into some
semblance of maintainability; some of the things I wanted to do were a bit too
computationally expensive, even pre-calculated.  Too many permutations, oy,
should have known.  So out they went.</p>

<p>Anyway, as my schedule has shifted and my fatigue has gotten a bit more
chronic, I've also taken a break from the word game and done some more design
work on TSC2 (which I'm not sure I'll actually call TSC2... Though to be honest
the word game doesn't have a name yet, either, not even a working name).  I've
also been playing TSC a fair bit and taking notes looking at the flaws I may not
have noticed before when I was closer to it &mdash; there really are a lot of
things that need to be reworked, and I've got lots of ideas for both structural
and feature improvements.</p>

<p>There's one really, really big design decision left to make, though &mdash;
do I put significant effort into making the game mobile-friendly (up to and
including the question: do I make a mobile version at all?), or just optimize it
for desktop?  It can't really be good at both, to be completely honest.  Given
that TSC was (essentially) a mobile game first, well.  In hindsight I know why
that happened, but it really did make a lot of things hard to do that I think
would make for a much better desktop game.  So I'm mulling over some design
decisions there right now.</p>

<p>So, tschüss!  Next post will probably be from Europe...  Somewhere.</p>

<p class="blog-footnote">[<a href="#back-1" id="foot-1">1</a>] ob-jetlag: 時差ぼけが大変ね。</p>
