id "blog-november"
title "Mobile and the Market"
date "2016-11-03 12:29PM -0600"
description "Some Thoughts on Mobile and Success"
tags ["lensflare", "sales", "mobile"]
--

<p>I had some thoughts prompted by an

{ link_abs("http://statelyplay.com/2016/11/01/lensflare-games-jumps-genres-again-releases-word-game-elexi/",
           "article")}

on { link_abs("http://statelyplay.com/", "Stately Play") }, a new game news
website set up by some

ex-{ link_abs("http://pockettactics.com/", "Pocket Tactics") }

folks. It's about the release of Elexi, but that's not why it's interesting.
First, go

{ link_abs("http://statelyplay.com/2016/11/01/lensflare-games-jumps-genres-again-releases-word-game-elexi/",
           "read it")}&nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;the

key bit is the next-to-last paragraph (i.e., the last paragraph before the
update).  Go ahead. I'll wait.</p>

<h2>On Market Struggles</h2>

<p>So, first off...  That's a really interesting paragraph to read on a site
that maybe at first glance you might think is just another news site about games
(i.e., the sort of site that highlights new releases and posts reviews and
such).  But if you read the site's charter or

{ link_abs("http://statelyplay.com/us/", "mission statement") }

or whatever you want to call it, you'd quickly realize there's already a bit
more to the site. Stately Play is looking to cultivate a bit more personality,
and that paragraph in that article rather aptly illustrates the point.<p>

<p>There's a lot to

{ link_abs("http://pressthink.org/2013/07/the-rise-of-the-personal-franchise-site-in-news/", "chew on") }

with regards to how journalistic voice contributes to the success of modern news
sites of all types.  I'm not really interested in talking about that today,
though.  What I do want to talk about is what that paragraph gets at, i.e., the
idea of how the economics of the app store affect indy developers. Because
there's something there that's just bang on&nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;although not about Elexi per
se, but it's definitely something that's true more generally.</p>

<p>First, an aside, regarding { link("elexi", "Elexi") } specifically: Elexi to
me isn't really a great example.

{ link("em16", "EM16") }, sure, and { link("tsc", "TSC")}?

Oh yeah.  But not Elexi as much.  It really <i>was</i> only meant to be a quick
project to see if I wanted to commit to Unity for larger projects, i.e. to make
sure I wasn't prematurely committing to using something I couldn't stand working
with. I really <i>did</i> envision it as a weekend project, i.e., do something
quick ➸ learn you some Unity for great good ➸ ??? ➸ profit.  But then a weekend
became a week, then a month, and finally ended up taking two (okay fine, three)
months in all. It's safe to say it's not much like the game I originally
envisioned (which was really my wife's idea anyway, now mutated beyond all
recognition).  But it took that long because once I started on it, I had some
ideas, then I had to finish it, and not just finish it, finish it up to
standard&nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;I'm just not going to put anything out there unless
I'm satisfied that it's ready.  I suppose I could have dropped it and not
released anything and moved on instead, but I liked the idea and I wanted to
play it, so I stuck to the plan and finish it I did.</p>

<p>But...  Ultimately I don't have particularly strong feelings about the game
or the game's success.  I really do have zip in the way of sales expectations.
Because it's on mobile where discovery is a thing, and it's almost certainly not
cost-effective to put a whole lot of effort into marketing it.  So I don't
expect much.  And, as long as it makes back the cost of making it (localization
costs money, assuming you're not natively fluent in eight languages)...  I don't
really care that much.  I mean, if it was wildly successful that'd be super
keen, but the key point here is that <i>it's not really the sort of thing I want
to keep doing</i>.  TSC and EM16 are.</p>

<p>So back to the main topic...  Talking about the market and app store[<a
href="#foot-1" id="back-1">1</a>] economics, yeah, there's a lot to talk about
there.  Realistically, the app store is not something I want to pour a lot into,
because I don't expect to get much back, not even as much as I put in. Sure,
there's also that strong reluctance I have to really put myself out there
(marketing is super, super hard for me).  I hate dealing with people, I'm really
uncomfortable talking myself up, and there's probably even a bit of imposter
syndrome there too for good measure.  (And if you're reading this and this seems
familiar, well, that's pretty much

{link_abs("http://positech.co.uk/cliffsblog/2016/04/09/risk-real-and-imagined-and-stress-new-game-launches/", "normal") },

even if we don't tend to talk about it very much.)  So there's that
too.</p>

<p>Put everything together and...  Well.  The app store doesn't plausibly seem
like the future.  And that's really, really not news to any indy developers who
have dealt with it.</p>

<h2>The Real World</h2>

<p>So let's put some concrete numbers on this.</p>

<p>Before Elexi, Lensflare Games had released two apps (Tactical Space Command,
Election Manager 2016) in five flavors (iOS and Mac OS for each, plus a free iOS
version of TSC).</p>

<div class="blog-image-right">
{ link('blog/sales.png',
       image('blog/t/sales.png',
             {alt: 'Setup Screen', class: 'ss-link',
              style: 'width: 300; height: 146;'}})) }
  <div class="blog-image-subtitle">
    Sales
  </div>
</div>

<p>Here's a graph of TSC and EM16 sales.  TSC has sold about 2200 units since
release (I'm not counting TSC Lite which only matters insofar as it drives TSC
sales, but that's about another 3500 units).  EM16 has approximately tripled
that, selling almost 6000.  Of that, about 85-90% of sales have been on mobile
(which means that the Mac App Store is basically a waste of effort unless the
marginal effort to release there is minimal.  I seriouisly doubt that's much of
a surprise to anyone, though). </p>

<p>Those...  Aren't good numbers if you look at developing games as a business.
TSC in particular wasn't exactly a financial success. Maybe it would have been
okay from a hobbyist standpoint (which, to be fair, I was at the time that I
wrote it and I've remained one until recently), but not really worth the effort
otherwise. EM16 was a bit better, and unlike TSC it's still selling.  Why was it
more successful? Probably two reasons, if I had to guess: (1) it's available on
both phone and tablet form factors (TSC is iPad-only), and (2) it's less niche
and/or more topical. Certainly marketing isn't the difference, because EM16 got
<i>zero</i> post-launch coverage (all of the coverage on Pocket Tactics was
pre-release. Nobody else noticed at all).</p>

<p>Those curves are pretty interesting, though.  TSC has what I understand is a
pretty typical sales curve (the second peak is when the scenario editor was
announced, and also mostly happened before an announced price increase went into
effect).  EM16 is something else, though.  EM16 sales have been (relatively
speaking) steady&nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;it had a few peaks but it never exactly took
fire. Maybe that's because it got zero coverage and all of the sales are
organic.  And the peaks aren't quite what I expected: the first peak was during
the primaries (that much makes sense).  The second was during the party
conventions but (unexpectedly to me) was much smaller.  There seems to barely be
a peak at all for the election itself and I <i>really</i> didn't expect
that&nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;I expected the strongest sales would be right now, but
they're not. Maybe because this election is awful and everyone who cares about
elections is sad.  I do expect sales will trail off after this month, but
probably slowly (judging by the rest of the sales curve).  I've been terrible at
sales predictions so far, though.</p>

<h2>So, Now What?</h2>

<p>So what does this all mean?  Well, here's the section that will make the fans
of my games on mobile sad.  All three of them.[<a href="#foot-2"
id="back-2">2</a>]</p>

<p>It means...  Mobile is bad market for me.  I'm
not sure it's a good market for anyone...  But for me it's just terrible.  I
could afford to not care about that when the games I made were experiments and
writing games was a hobby, but now that I've gone full-time developing games, I
can't afford to spend a lot of effort targeting mobile anymore.  Not when I'm
making the games I want to make (things like TSC or EM16 or other very broadly
similar projects I have queued up). Strategy on mobile just isn't a thing that
sells.  Or, more specifically, it isn't a thing I can sell.</p>

<p>So here's a thing: mobile is actually an immense market.  Strategy on mobile
is...  Maybe a significant market?  It's hard to tell.  Potentially?  But the
reality is, it's apparently nothing <i>but</i> potential.  You can't live on
potential.</p>

<p>If TSC and EM16 had sold ten times more copies on mobile, that number of
sales would still be a tiny, tiny, <i>infinitesimal</i> fraction of overall
sales on the platforms.  And it might be a significant fraction of the strategy
games that sell on the platform.  Or it might be a small fraction.  It's much
harder to tell there.  (How big <i>is</i> that market, anyway?  It's just so
hard to say.)  But let's just imagine that it's huge: I still don't have any
practical or effective way to reach it. With a big enough sales budget I don't
doubt it would be possible increase sales by that factor of ten, but I don't
have a big sales budget, and I also suspect very strongly that it would
ultimately be a net loss. TSC had good coverage (as these things go), but (to
exaggerate slightly) good coverage was: one site of any significance noticed it,
because that's pretty much it for outlets that cover stuff like this.  And
coverage really <i>did</i> drive sales...  But only about one tenth of what
sales needed to be for this to be worthwhile in a business sense, because only a
tiny fraction of the market actually reads any coverage about mobile games in
the first place.</p>

<p>In short, there just doesn't seem to be a path to sustainability here.</p>

<p>Am I bitter about it?  Maybe sometimes, I guess, but mostly not really. It is
what it is. Am I negative about it?  Well, yeah, but I think justifiably so.
Does it make me reluctant to get excited about how anything will sell on mobile
or talk things up on the platform?  Hell yes. Because yes, the performance of my
games so far is disappointing.  On the other hand&nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;TSC and EM16
were experiments when the price of failure was low, and the results were between
failure and mixed, and that's okay.  I suppose I can't even particularly claim
to be surprised, because I don't actually <i>like</i> playing more than the rare
game on mobile&nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;I'm really a PC gamer in my true heart, the
sort that wants a 30" monitor so he can rack up literally thousands and
thousands of hours playing Paradox games.  Or establishing his system-wide
communications and logistics network in Kerbal Space Program. Or optimizing
circuit production and a rail network in Factorio.</p>

<p>But the bottom line is that I can't really afford to experiment anymore, not
if I actually want to keep making games.  That means TSC2 will be released first
on PC and maybe on mobile if it's not too hard to adapt.  This time I'll be
making a desktop game, and it frankly also means TSC2 will be a better game
because it won't be held back by the many limitations that mobile puts on games
(even if mobile has a couple of advantages to compensate).  Not even counting
any improvements TSC2 will have from the lessons learned writing TSC the first
time. And even if and when it does get ported to mobile, the translation will
probably lose something in the process. Dealing with the limitations of mobile
was an interesting challenge for TSC &nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;and
EM16&nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;but they're still limitations.</p>

<p>And that's the way it is.  But again&nbsp;&mdash;&nbsp;I'm not sure I really
belonged on mobile in the first place.</p>

<p>Discovery on Steam might be its own shitshow, though.  So maybe I'll be back
looking for a "real" job soon enough.  We'll see.</p>

<h2>Next Time</h2>

<p>Thinking about doing a more specific postmortem on Elexi, maybe next
week.  Haven't decided yet, though.</p>

<p class="blog-footnote">[<a href="#back-1" id="foot-1">1</a>] meaning either
the App Store itself or Google Play and the like.</p>

<p class="blog-footnote">[<a href="#back-2" id="foot-2">2</a>] I may not have
many fans, but on the bright side they invariably have impeccable taste.</p>
