
id "blog-optimize"
title "Optimize Prime"
date "2016-07-10 02:55PM -0600"
description "Testing, Memory, and Optimization"
tags ["alpha testing", "optimization", "memory management", "ios", "elexi", "word game"]
--
<p>So, the game has a name now: Elexi.  It's not impossible that it will
change, but I like the sound of it, so for now, Elexi it is.</p>

<p>Anyway, since our last exciting installment of this blog that one other
person reads (not counting our cats), I've been pretty heads-down working on the
tutorial[<a href="#foot-1" id="back-1">1</a>] and letter sets/word lists for the
various languages I want to support.  The tutorial and letters/words go
together, of course, since (assuming I actually <i>do</i> make the game
international) the tutorial has to work for everything, not just English.</p>

<div class="blog-image-right">
{ link('blog/word-screen2.png',
       image('blog/t/word-screen2.png',
             {alt: 'Setup Screen', class: 'ss-link',
              style: 'width: 200; height: 300;'}})) }
  <div class="blog-image-subtitle">
    options
  </div>
</div>

<p>This also led to vast amounts of optimization work.</p>

<p>I primarily discovered this through testing the intro on our old 512MB iPad
mini test hardware &mdash; the first pass at the tutorial was just too slow,
largely because the method I was using to check to see if strings were words was
incredibly slow (or rather, the method plus the way I was storing the word
data).  So, did so some optimization there to speed it up (first just fixing
some somewhat poor design choices &mdash; at least for the final use case under
stress &mdash; then trading space for time, as you do[<a href="#foot-2"
id="back-2">2</a>]).  Got things a few orders of magnitude faster, which I'd
need later (although I'd have to trade some of that space back, too).<p>

<p>This is why you test.</p>

<p>And then I started working on the word lists.  Which didn't go well.</p>

<p>Originally I grabbed some basic word lists intended for spellchecking, but
these were kind of crap. They were inconsistent about capitalization and
inflection (among other problems).  I ended up grabbing whatever free
dictionaries/word lists I could find and combining the data and comparing it
with the other lists I had (and then doing some manual massaging) and finally
ended up with something that (probably) has a decent set of inflections and
such. Which is great for English, but for Romance languages in particular, you
end up with millions of different word forms with any significant base
vocabulary. And, uh, of course the base vocabularies were full of questionable
words.  So... Well, loading those crashed the iPad when it (inevitably) ran out
of memory.  It turns out that memory is thing.  Well, this isn't exactly a
surprise to anyone that's done any work with Apple devices &mdash; memory is
<i>always</i> a thing on iOS, really.[<a href="#foot-3" id="back-3">3</a>]</p>

<p>This, again, is why you test, even if the results aren't much of a
surprise.<p>

<p>Still, I didn't want to give up on inflected forms (or the idea of
international support in general), and with various optimizations of the word
lists and the way I was using them (as well as making changes to the way the
letters match, i.e., changing how I deal with diacritics and the like &mdash;
particularly sticky questions when dealing with languages like French or
Portuguese which are just <i>full</i> of phonemic diacritics), I finally managed
to get things pretty much under control.  The word lists still aren't really...
Great.  Well, the English list is pretty good (I did a fair bit of manual
cleanup there[<a href="#foot-4" id="back-4">4</a>], though even then I had to
make some compromises &mdash; hello, UK readers!), but the others have some
issues I'd like to deal with if and when I can. Some of the issues are more
intractable than others there, to be honest, but the most important thing is
that I have something I can work with for now.</p>

<p>And here we are.  The iPad mini doesn't crash anymore, at least.</p>

<p class="blog-footnote">[<a href="#back-1" id="foot-1">1</a>] which is called
the "intro" in the game.  It's short, but covers the main points, and that's how
it should be.</p>

<p class="blog-footnote">[<a href="#back-2" id="foot-2">2</a>] incidentally,
this is the time to do your hard-core optimization &mdash; when mechanics have
settled down.  Usually, anyway, it's possible to do it too late and end up with
something that just can't be fixed, but it's also not a great idea to spend a
lot of time doing it early when there's a good chance you'll just be throwing
stuff out.</p>

<p class="blog-footnote">[<a href="#back-3" id="foot-3">3</a>] garbage
collection is a thing in C# and Unity, too, but that's a whole other post.</p>

<p class="blog-footnote">[<a href="#back-4" id="foot-4">4</a>] for one, nth is
just not a word, or at least, not a useful one. Nobody looks at a board and
says, "oh, hey, I can spell 'nth' with that."</p>
