id "blog-unity"
title "On the Unity Front"
date "2016-05-23 05:09PM -0600"
description "Playing with Unity again"
tags ["unity", "life", "travel"]
--

<p>So, I've been playing with Unity again.  I've played with it before &mdash; I
did some performance testing on an iPad2 once upon a time to see how TSC2 might
go if I switched engines, but other than that and a couple random tutorials to
get the lay of the land, that was about it.  For the record, the conclusion I
came to was that the Unity3D API drew lines much faster than Cocoa, but mainly
because it doesn't draw them nearly as nicely (i.e., Cocoa has very nice
antialiasing and such).  By the time you add back in the effects to make look as
nice, well, I'm guessing it'll probably be closer to a wash, but we'll probably
see soon enough.</p>

<p>Anyway.</p>

<p>To be honest, so far I haven't gotten a whole lot farther into Unity this
time than I did then (more on that below), but my opinion of it hasn't changed
much. It's... Not exactly great?  But if you really want to go cross-platform
(in particular, for any definition of "cross-platform" that includes mobile)
there just aren't really any better options.  The problem for me is that it adds
so much cruft with so little benefit; it's heavy and awkward for simple things,
it's way too oriented towards people who are scared of code or something, and
the 3D stuff is almost a complete and utter waste of time for me (I mean, all I
need is a GUI and basic line drawing &mdash; okay, maybe some fills, but still
all basic 2D operations for vector icons and maps and labels and such for every
game I've done so far, and probably for at least the next three as well).  I'd
much prefer something like a naked API and some sort of cross-platform bundler
to the... IDE thing?  (What <i>do</i> you call that thing?  It's not an IDE.)
But there it is. At least the GUI stuff does seem markedly improved in this
version from when I was playing with it before (I guess that was Unity 4 onGui
stuff or something? I don't really remember, but it was a weird model to say the
least).  The bottom line is, it's not exactly an ideal tool for what I need, but
it's not completely intolerable or anything, and I'm stuck with it under the
circumstances.</p>

<p>So mostly I shrug.  It's sort of like the F-35 of development frameworks
(keep it out of actual dogfights and it'll be fine?), only with a much more
reasonable budget.</p>

<p>Anyway, I'm not as far along by this point as I'd hoped I'd be.  Partly
because I'd been having trouble getting any momentum going, but I wasn't really
that worried about that, since I did also need some time to unwind, and I felt
reasonably comfortable giving myself a month or so there.  But when I was
finally done with all that and ready to go, several frustrating things dropped
in my lap and derailed everything.</p>

<p>Some stuff I'm not going to go into depth about &mdash; gah, mad scrambling
to deal with a particularly broken health insurance situation, 'nuff said
&mdash; and some other dumb stuff, too.  Like...  It's a good thing I bought my
old laptop from the old job, because four-year-old personal laptop decided to
just start randomly crapping out on me (random still-not-frequent but worrisome
crashes), which resulted in a few days migrating all my data off of it (i.e.,
transferring a few hundred GB of data and credentials and such for personal
email and music collections and all the other things I'd used it for.  And I'm
nowhere near done dealing with that, because I just dumped everything on my new
laptop for now to deal with later, but...  the important stuff is moved and/or
transferred and set up and I can deal with the rest when I'm ready).  So, here I
am, somewhat ironically buying back (for myself) the laptop I just bought for
Lensflare (from the old company I worked for).  So, RIP Loki, hello Heimdall, so
much for keeping things focused and specialized, please handle all the things,
let's try to keep it all a bit more organized than last time when everything was
on Loki, kthxbye.</p>

<p>The other big thing is that I'm slowly shifting my schedule to CEST (Central
European Summer Time...  Everybody knows that, right?  Right?) for a trip to
Europe soon.  I'm not super happy about going to Europe this year (who complains
about going to Europe? That's right, this guy!), but it's a family obligation
(sister-in-law is marrying a Dutchman, who flies about as much as you'd expect
for a Dutchman who is currently living in Hong Kong to fly), so off I go.  But
jet lag is a real BFD[<a href="#foot-1" id="back-1">1</a>] for me (about an hour
a day shift is the most I can manage even when circumstances are ideal &mdash;
and going east is just <i>the worst</i>), so I've started shifting my schedule
early because it's better to be less than 100% functional now when I'm at home
and can deal with it, rather than when I'm trying to navigate the trains in a
country where I've been all of once before (and just passing through at that,
hello Belgium!) and working my way to my final destination. Or at least that was
the theory, the last few days I've been pretty exhausted as I transition into
what's effectively jet lag in situ, and the last couple of days in particular my
sleep's been quite badly disrupted.  And sleep is a thing, so...  Well.</p>

<p>Still, it's probably the right decision to do it this way (and a bit too late
to change my mind anyway), so hopefully I'm through the worst.  I guess we'll
see.  On the bright side, I'll be in KÃ¶ln and Maastricht and such soon, which
doesn't really suck (all things being equal &mdash; which, of course, they
aren't...  Man, air travel sure is shit, isn't it?  Especially long-haul air
travel).</p>

<p>But...  Could be a lot worse.  And I'm starting to make some progress with
Unity now, so there's that.</p>

<p class="blog-footnote">[<a href="#back-1" id="foot-1">1</a>] As an aside, I
soooo love getting advice from people who don't get meaningful jet lag on how to
deal with it. Oh, yeah?  You don't really get jet lag, that's really great for
you. Yeah, I'll just stay up until I'm over it &mdash; staying awake
continuously for, oh, two weeks?  Yes, that's very practical, thank you!  Now
shut up and go away and maybe go make yourself useful by giving somebody some
advice on how to just get over cancer or something.</p>
